---
aliases: []
tags: [dynamic_microsimualtion, microsimulation, review, health, extrapolation, continuous_time, discrete_time]
author: "Martin Spielauer"
URL: "https://www.microsimulation.pub/articles/00005"
title: "Spielauer 2007 - Review of dynamic microsimualtion for health care"
type: "literature"
status: "in-progress"
year: "2021-11-26"
---

# Key Points

> What are they key takeaways from this literature
- Paper provides a review of a number of interesting health DMSIMS for health and takeaway lessons from them. 
- Health models cover 4 key types of projection:
	-  demographies.
	-  earnings.
	-  care supply and demand.
	-  unit costs of health care.
	
- Health models differ in 5 key ways: 
	- trust in projections.
	- model complexity.
	- amount of explicit behavioural modelling.
	- population used (real data/synthetic).
	- types of policy counterfactuals.  
	
- Comparison of health MSIMS with the '12 SAGE Lessons' stresses:
	-  the tradeoff between model detail and predictive power. As more variables are added the model becomes more uncertain and less interpretable. Behavioural prediction gets better but aggregate estimates get worse.
	-  the model should objectives should be clearly defined beforehand to determine detail required
	-   MSIMS need to be flexible to handle additional data or processes that may be required for certain policy questions.
	-   Modelling of explicit behaviour is expensive but better estimates data generating process. Continuous time models are useful here but expensive. ABM hybrids may be the answer.
# Motivation

> Why was this literature written what problem is it addressing?
- Many literature reviews have been undertaken to draw lessons from previous microsimulation work. This paper capitalises on 40 years of development for health microsimulation.
- 27 models were selection anddescribed in this work. 7 are reviews in extensive detail DYNASIM, CORSIM, DYNAMOD, LifePaths, MOSART, and NCCSO due to specific health focuses. These models were chosen to represent different approaches in microsimulation. Models are criticised on alignment techniques, complexity and variables used, theoretical foundations, starting population, and financial issues covered.
# Background

> What previous work has been done towards this problem?

Work presents a number of models
- Dynamsim was the first dynamic microsimualtion model from Orcutt.
	-  Dynasim 2 and 3 were also produced later on. They focus on pension simulation and population aging. Health is measured by limitations on daily activities.
	-   Organised into three sub models for family earnings, job/benefits history, and cross sectional imputation. Coss section imputation model is static and used to impute additional information into a single file for a given year generated by other two submodels. 
	-    Modular structure is interesting. It allows for interactions with other domains and behaviours. Modelling on top of other dynamic models without feeback. Cross sectional imputation to project cross-sectional covariates. 
	-    The main lesson is there is a tradeoff between simplicity and ability to model behavioural response. (1)

- CORSIM is used to model welfare reform proposals. It is the most widely research and developed model over 30 years and is the basis for many other models (canada/sweden).
	- Uses US census datasets as its base. Aim is to incorporate numers data files from microdata, aggregates, cross-sectional modelling, and statistics. Has over 7000 parameters from 1100 equations.
	- Vs DYNASIM CORSIM is one singular model divided into 26 modules. Again modules do not feedback into main model (is there a difference between a module and a model..?)
	- CORSIMs distinct due to its initial population from 40 years ago. Allows for long term nowcasting/validation not really available yet in other datasets. 
	- It does however heavily use alignment to recalibrate projections to published data. Can make difficult to interpret projections with bizarre mobility. “without realigning or rebasing the data for a recent historic year, projections of future years may begin from a base that already is subject to errors accumulated over a 35 year simulation period” (2). Can align to aggregates but not way to check joint distributions.  I.E. extrapolation long term struggles to keep population representiveness.
- DYNAMOD is an Australian model projecting demographics, migration, education, labour, and so on over 30 years.
	- It is based on dynasim2. 
	- Uses a pseudocontinuous time framework operating in monthly steps for labour/demographics and yearly steps for education/earnings. Uses maximum survival functions to trade off between time granularity and computing demands. Survival functions need constant re-evaluation based on attribute changes. E.g. a personse time of death is determined when they are born and re-evaluate given a change in health state. Allows for continuous time competing risk modelling. Very hard to develop these models though. (1)
- Lifepaths is a canadian DMSIM for general purpose demographic behaviour project that is different from everything else so far.
	- Operates in continous time. Transitions are modelled as waiting times between events akin to continuous Markov chains. 
	- Individuals here are modelled as cases. These cases consist of dominant individuals whose spouses and children are modelled as part of the case. The entirety of each case is simulated sequentially. The model is open such that cases can leave and enter as desired. Perhaps a case splits into two.
	- Since a sythetic population is used the number of cases is set by the user. A sample of millions can reduce noise in outputs from Monte Carlo Sampling.
	- In terms of health, hazard models for movement between 5 states are used. 
	- Continuous time modelling of transitions is more compelex but more interpretable particularly for behaviours. It is also highly flexible to add modules as desired and can be used as cross-sectional input data for other models. Also interesting is the use of an open source framework MODGEN which has lead to a number of splinter models.

MOSART is a norwegian DIMSIM for policy of public expenditure.
	- There are three version of this model focusing on labour dmoegrpahics and pensions. Recently household formation and disability are included.
	- Most events are built using transition matrics and logit regressions. This model is designed to be simple with reliable data and easy to understand models.
	
NCCSU long term care model is developed for the UK population. It is the micro component of a micro-macro model.
- The model is highly specialised in terms of an older population and characteristics simulatied. 65+ year olds assessing care expenditure under alternate policy.
- Uses a macro model to generate potential future demographic scenarios and micro model to assess expenditure under this scenario. This is done by weighting micro-population accordingly. 
- This model is interesting as it can study sensetivity of policy under alternative assumptions on population ageing. 


# Results

> What was the outcome of the research? Was it successful?

- Health models cover 5 key types of projection. demographies, earnings, care demand, unit costs of health care, and available care supply.
- Health MSIMS differ in a number of ways:
	- Trust in strenght of projection. Controversially  microsims need aligning to external data. Alignment factors are calculated as time series to adjust microsim accordingly. There has been a focus on predicting alignment factors from these time series rather than changing the model (see 2). This is due to specification randomness. With more variables the less robust an empirical estimate is. It reduces prediction power but reduces risk of omitted variable bias (bias variance tradeoff). Aligning a model can make it more uncertain. Instead microsims may be aligned to macro models believed to have higher predictive power. However outputs may have to be aligned to satisfy 'what-if' scenarios. Policy makers require aggregate outcomes that match some theoretical basis/ match other models. 
	- Degree of detail/number of variables. Fewer variables produces more simple trustworthy output but are predictively weak and limit analysis of behaviour. Many variables must be assumed independent of predictors. For example, if health is used as a predictor it is assumed income/education are independent when they are not. It can bias joint distributions. If the population is representative this may not be a problem. It generates a tradeoff between good aggregate predictions and good distribution prediction in the long run. (RC: not sure what this means. I think its a trade-off between mobility and aggregate validation. May have good aggregates but individuals are 'forced' to align and may create stupid distributions of behaviour.). Microsims also have exogeneity issues. That is a predictor is correlated with the outcome in a transition model. Micro-macro models may resolve this but are expensive. MOSART is simple and has done this (see 3). 
	
	- Amount of explicit behavioural modelling. Balance between theory and statistical 'black-boxes'. Behaviour modelling takes into account full individual history rather than predictive modelling which chooses important features. Agent based behaviour may be the answer here. The inclusion of explicit behvaiour is supported by time frameworks that dont rely solely on transition models. DYNAMOD is a good example here.
	- way population is created. Synthetic populations are typically used when a population doesnt contain desired characteristics. A unique situation is the idea of extrapolation. As microsimulation allows for individual accounting, it might be especially useful to study sustainability issues in the presence of transition dynamics – that is, in situations in which the health risk patterns in the initial phase of the transition might differ considerably from the long-term pattern. Can individuals in a starting population be replaced as hard data becomes avilable?
	- inclusion of financial issues
	- policy counterfactuals.

# Results - 12 SAGE Lessons

- 'A successful model requires clear objectives'. Health MSIMS are tools for investigation of health process. Hence any MSIM has to model changes in health attributes. Generally very clear objectives.
- If the objective is to project health care, the model should produce its own population aggregates without being aligned to other projections. MSIMS should be flexible in specifying external aggregates for sensitivity analyses in the short medium/term. 
-  If an MSIM is for input for another model/ half of a micro-macro model then clear interfaces between models need to be defined beforehand. MSIMS need to be flexible enough to include additional relevant processes/variables to be comprehensive.
- There is a general tradeoff between higher detail variables and predictive power of models. Can also be seen as a trade off between cross-ssectional detail and interpretability of a model for long term forecasting. ' A possible way to avoid such a trade-off might be to design a microsimulation model as a modelling platform rather than as one single model, suitable to include different degrees of detail depending on the projection horizon.' (RC: many models and often strategy?)
- 'Models need to be sensetive to shortcomings of data.'. Health msims typically use a wide number of data sources synthetically. Need to be highly flexible to incorporate more recent data as it arrives. (adaptive DMSIM?)
- "Limits of data, and the difficulties of modelling ‘continuous time’ mean that a traditional structure may be preferable. However, it may bring dividends to introduce innovations into a traditional structure. For example, the feasibility of looking at certain events on a shorter timescale (e.g. monthly) should be explored. In addition, hazard rates and survival functions should be examined”. Has been done numerous times already. Use of continuous or pseudo-continuous timescales can be more appropriate if more expensive. (RC: this is where I come in..)
- The end data of MSIMS is important. Social projections can take place over 50-100 years. Likewise many datasets dont go back 50 years so MSIMS can be used to backcast.
- Data representitiveness is more important than detail. Again bias-variance tradeoff. Not so much of a problem as surveys get better.
- Finally model validation should be done first with sensetivity analyses to estimate impact of certain parameters. Retrospective validation (nowcasting) is also helpful. Definitely true for health too. Further fuels need for open source code to make validation easier. LifePaths and MODGEN are particularly useful for this.  

# Glossary
Any new words should be defined here or reference from the main glossary in /Utility/glossary.  If there isnt a file in the main glossary you can still tag it here and create it later.
1. 

# References
1. Problems and Prospects for Dynamic Microsimulation: A Review and Lessons for APPSIM. NATSEM Discussion Paper 63
	Cassels, Harding, and Kelly. (2006)
2. Models for retirement policy analysis, Report to the Society of Actuaries (http://www.soa.org/research/pension/research-models-for-retirement-policy-analysis.aspx) JM Anderson (1997)
3. Model 1: MOSART In: A Gupta, A Harding, editors. _Modelling our Future: Population Ageing, Health and Aged Care, 16_. North-Holland, Amsterdam: International Symposia in Economics. pp. 433–437. D Fredriksen N Stolen (2007)




